Brian Johnson’s

PhilosophersNotes

TM

More Wisdom in Less Time

THE BIG IDEAS
Value Your Sleep
= Tip #1.

Avoid the Screens

Sleep Smarter

21 Proven Tips to Sleep Your Way To a Better Body, Better Health
and Bigger Success
BY SHAWN STEVENSON · MODEL HOUSE PUBLISHING © 2014 · 160 PAGES

Easiest way to optimize.

Adenosine

How caffeine really works.

Stay Cool

Think: 60 to 68 degrees Fahrenheit.

Vitamin G

You getting enough?

Meditate in Morning
To sleep better at night.

Night-time Ritus

The ritual of doing what works.

“Sleep is the secret sauce.
There isn’t one facet of your mental, emotional, or physical performance that’s not
affected by the quality of your sleep.
The big challenge is that in our fast-paced world today, millions of people are
chronically sleep deprived and suffering the deleterious effects of getting low
quality sleep.
The consequences of sleep deprivation aren’t pretty either. Try immune system
failure, diabetes, cancer, obesity, depression, and memory loss just to name a few.
Most people don’t realize that their continuous sleep problems are also a catalyst
for the diseases and appearance issues they’re struggling with.
Studies have shown that just one night of sleep deprivation can make you as
insulin resistant as a type-2 diabetic. This translates directly to aging faster,
decreased libido, and storing more body fat than you want (say it ain’t so!).
Now stretch that over weeks, months, even years, and you can start to see why lack
of sleep can be such a huge problem.”
~ Shawn Stevenson from Sleep Smarter
Shawn Stevenson is a health coach who has one of the most popular health & fitness podcasts

“A pioneer, and leading
authority on sleep research,
Dr. William Dement said,
‘You’re not healthy, unless
your sleep is healthy.’”
~ Shawn Stevenson

out there called The Model Health Show.
This is a short, quick-reading, funny and practical little book featuring 21 tips on how to optimize
your sleep. (Get the book here on Amazon where it’s really highly rated. :)
I read it as part of my preparation for teaching Optimal Sleep 101. (Check out our growing
collection of Notes on sleep/rest/nap books!)
I could have riffed on any one of these tips/Big Ideas. I’m excited to share some of my favorites
(including some that have already positively impacted my life) so let’s jump straight in!
... We’ll kick it off with a quick reminder of just how important your sleep is:

REMEMBER THE VALUE OF YOUR SLEEP
“Always remember the value of your sleep. You will perform better, make better decisions,
and have a better body when you get the sleep you require. Sleep is not an obstacle we need to
go around, it’s a natural state your body requires to boost your hormone function, heal your
muscles, tissues and organs, and make your mind work at its optimal level. The shortcut to
success is not made by bypassing dreamland. You will factually work better, be more efficient,
and get more stuff done when you’re properly rested.

1

PhilosophersNotes | Sleep Smarter

There’s a big difference between ‘working’ and actually being effective. By sacrificing your sleep,
“There was a time, not that

you can definitely do more work but the quality and effectiveness of your work will be sacrificed.

long ago in our history, that

A physician study published in The Lancet proved that sleep-deprived individuals took 14

humans were prey, and in

percent longer to complete a task, and made 20 percent more errors than individuals who were

tremendous danger if they

well rested. Structure your time to get more sleep first and you’ll be able to get your work done

were rummaging around at

faster and more effectively than if you zombie walked your way through it.”

night.”
~ Shawn Stevenson

That’s Tip #1: Know the Value of Sleep.
Now, I’m not sure where you are on the “Sleep is important” spectrum, but I KNOW that a great
night of sleep is my #1 non-negotiable self-care habit that keeps me most plugged in.
(btw: This little Micro Class will probably always be one of if not THE most important Micro
Class I do.)
If I don’t get my 8-ish + hours of sleep a night I just don’t have the same zip in my mind I
REALLY like to have. Less than 6 and you don’t want to be around me. (Hah.)
So, I don’t need a lot of convincing that sleep is super important.
If you do, KNOW that it’s super important. :) But only if you want to optimize and actualize.
It’s the secret sauce.
Let’s remember just how important it is.
And let’s take a quick look at some Ideas on how to dial it in.

AVOID THE SCREENS BEFORE BEDTIME
“This is likely the number one thing you can do to improve your sleep quality immediately. The
artificial blue light emitted by electronic screens triggers your body to produce more daytime
hormones (like cortisol) and disorient your body’s natural preparation for sleep.
Computers, iPads, televisions, smartphones, etc. are kicking out a sleep-sucking blue spectrum
of light that can give you major sleep problems.”
That’s Tip #3. (Right after getting morning sun.)
Avoiding the blue-light emitting screens before bedtime is, as Shawn advises, probably the #1
thing we can do to optimize our sleep.
At least (!) 90 minutes before you intend to go to sleep, turn off all your electronics.
Your computer. Your iPad. Your TV. Your smartphone.
OFF. OFF. OFF. OFF.
Although these devices are ubiquitous these days, we’ve gotta remember that we evolved for
MILLIONS of years without them.
Back in the day, the sun went down and we slowed down. We weren’t wandering around getting
all jacked up at night. We would have been prey. And we would have been dead.
It’s only over the last few decades (starting with the TV) that these devices have become such
a big part of our lives. And, really, only over the last DECADE (with the introduction of the
smartphone) that they’ve become SO omnipresent.
So, if you want to optimize your sleep, turn them off. Starting tonight!
P.S. In Optimal Sleep 101 we’ll have a complete “Sleep Gear” sheet, for now, check out f.lux if you
haven’t already, and think about getting these sweet bluelight blocking glasses if you want to be
really cool.

2

PhilosophersNotes | Sleep Smarter

“Not getting enough sleep, and
not sleeping in darkness, will
age you faster and suck away
your vitality. So, with all the
new-found data to back it
up, the best solution for
improving your sleep is to get
your room blacked out.”
~ Shawn Stevenson

P.P.S. Shawn tells us that 50% of Americans sleep with their cell phones by their side. Research
(sponsored by the mobile companies themselves!) shows that people who check their phones
before going to bed take longer to reach deep sleep and spend less time there. Get your phone
out of your room if you want to optimize your sleep.
P.P.P.S. Here’s another fascinating thing: Did you know your skin has receptors that can pick
up light? Your skin can LITERALLY see. Nuts. So... Make sure you’re sleeping in a super dark
environment (so dark you can’t see your hand in front of your face). My sleep environment is
pretty good but black out curtains will be arriving soon. You?

ADENOSINE + HOW CAFFEINE REALLY WORKS
“Caffeine has the unique ability to fit into receptor sites in your body for adenosine, because it’s
so structurally similar to the real thing. Normally, when your receptor sites are filled with real
adenosine, your body shifts into rest mode. The issue with caffeine going into those receptors is
that it simply sits there like a distant relative over-extending their stay on your couch. It doesn’t
actually turn on functions, like adenosine would, to make you tired. As a result, your brain and
body are still trucking along and you don’t realize that you’re actually sleepy. Pretty cool in some
ways, but hopefully you can see where this could become a big problem.”
So, this is from Tip #4: Have a Caffeine Curfew.
Basic Big Idea? Caffeine has a half-life of around 5-8 hours—meaning that if you had a coffee
with 200 mg of caffeine in it at 10 a.m., half of that (or 100 mg for the non-Math majors) is still
in your system as late as 6 p.m. (That’s a lot.)
So, if you’re going to use caffeine, do it earlier in the day. Have a “caffeine curfew.” (For most
people, Shawn tells us that curfew is no later than 2 p.m. Jacking yourself later in the day just
isn’t wise if you’re hoping for a good night of sleep.)
Most of us know that at this point.
Here’s something I didn’t know: Caffeine doesn’t actually “give you energy.” What it really does
is mask your fatigue. And the way it does that is fascinating.

“Eve Van Cauter, Ph.D., called
sleep deprivation ‘The royal

So, short story: Your neurons are firing all day long. As they do so, they produce a by-product
known as adenosine. The more firing, the more adenosine. Adenosine usually binds with

route to obesity.’ Now

receptors and basically alerts your body to the fact that you’re working hard and nudges you

understanding the fact that

toward sleep and recovery. As the adenosine piles up, you get more tired—a VERY important

sleep deprivation decreases

signal for you to REST.

your insulin sensitivity,

Apparently caffeine can fit into those adenosine receptors and basically block them from doing

disrupts your hormone

their job—so you don’t get the signal that you’re actually tired.

cycles, and depressed your
brain function, we know her
statement is 100% true.”
~ Shawn Stevenson

Now, that can be great in the moment.
But you’re basically borrowing energy. And, that energy needs to be paid back at some point.
If you do it once in a while, you can get away with it and pay back the debt. But if you use it all.
the.time to mask an underlying failure to recover properly, you’re overextending yourself and in
for a much bigger issue.
I like the way my friend Brendan Brazier puts it in The Thrive Diet (see Notes): “I consider coffee
drinking an uncomplementary stress. I view it as a form of credit, similar to shopping with a
credit card. You get energy now that you don’t actually have, but you pay for it later—when
the ‘bill,’ or fatigue, hits. (Simply drinking more coffee to put off the inevitable is like paying
off one credit card with another: It will catch up with you sooner or later.) You’ll most likely
pay a high interest rate as well, needing more time to recover than if that energy had not been
borrowed in the first place. This is the beginning of a vicious cycle.”

PhilosophersNotes | Sleep Smarter

3

All part of a longer chat on the optimal use of caffeine (I drink coffee twice a month on the
days I teach my Master Classes as it’s a nice little performance booster) but for our purposes
remember: if you use caffeine, have a curfew.
Let adenosine do it’s job.

STAY COOL
“Studies have found that
the ideal room temperature
for sleep is really quite cool
at around 60 to 68 degrees
Fahrenheit. Anything too far

“If you live in a home where you can regulate the temperature, you’re more fortunate than
billions of other people on the planet. With that said, overdoing it on the warmth can result in
your sleeping the ‘right’ amount of hours but not feeling rested when you wake up. If you’ve got
seven covers, an electric blanket, and you’re dressed like you’re going hunting, you just might be
preventing your body from getting the most rejuvenating stages of sleep.”

above or below this range

Shawn shares a couple Tips on the importance of being cool—one related to setting the

will likely cause difficulty

thermostat just right and another on not bundling yourself up like an arctic hunter.

sleeping.”
~ Shawn Stevenson

There’s some fascinating research he shares re: thermoregulation. Here’s what we need to know:
Our bodies can keep us WARM a lot easier than they can keep us COOL.
And, being cool is a really important part of getting an optimal amount of sleep.
So, stay cool.
Specifically, the ideal room temperature is 60 to 68 degrees Fahrenheit.
One of the biggest little things I ever did for my sleep was to set my thermostat for 68 degrees.
(And I actually took that down to 66 degrees to run a little experiment after reading this book.)
So, what’s YOUR thermostat set at these days?
And are you overly dressed for night time?
Stay cool!

YOU GETTING YOUR VITAMIN G?
“Since the beginning of time, humans have had a constant connection with the earth. Our
ancestors would come in contact with the earth’s surface on a daily basis: walking, hunting,
gathering food and water, communing, playing, relaxing and more. Nearly everything they did
required a connection with the earth.
Today, in our industrialized world, many people go days, weeks, or even longer without coming
in contact with the surface of the earth itself. We are cooped up in our homes or offices, spending
more time indoors consuming technology, and less time interacting with the source that all that
technology comes from. Sure, we may walk outside to get into our cars, but most of us wear nonconductive rubber-soled shoes that ensure our bodies never get that intimate connection. We
rarely touch the ground, rarely touch a tree, and rarely touch the source that creates every cell in
our body.
Scientists are discovering that this is having a huge impact on our health.”
That’s from Tip #20 and probably the one that most impacted me: Get Grounded.
As I was reading that passage, I tried to remember the last time my bare feet actually hit the
earth.
I’m almost a little embarrassed to say, but I couldn’t remember! :0
I’m pretty sure it was maybe a year ago when Emerson and I went to the beach. (Oh, my!)

4

PhilosophersNotes | Sleep Smarter

I thought I was ALL about “being a good animal” and leaning into certain behaviors that we’ve
“This may come as a shock,

evolved to follow (like circadian rhythms, less technology, etc.) but I pretty much NEVER touch

but a 2009 study found that

the earth. Yikes.

women who slept in their bra

Shawn calls this Vitamin G.

had a 60 percent greater risk
for developing breast cancer.”
~ Shawn Stevenson

As in Vitamin Grounding. Making connection with the good ol’ Earth.
A growing body of research says it’s essential.
The short story: We run on electromagnetic energy. So does the earth. “Bottom line: You may
not be able to see it, but you are highly conductive. You give off and receive energy every second
of every day. The misuse and misunderstanding of your body’s electrical system is a catalyst for
chronic health problems.”
I have to admit that I’ve always found the whole “earthing”/“grounding” thing to be a little too
far out there. After reading this chapter, I no longer feel that way. As I type this I’m finally using
the grounding mat Alexandra told me to get a long time ago as she’s our family vanguard on such
things. Thank you, darling. :)
I’ll be actively looking for ways to make more pure contact with the earth. (And... I’ll be looking
into grounding sheets and other gear. More on all that soon. Wish me luck!)
How about you? When’s the last time your bare feet touched the bare earth? You getting enough
Vitamin G?

MEDITATE IN MORNING TO SLEEP BETTER AT NIGHT
“One of the best times for meditation is when you’re already close to the alpha and theta brain
waves. This would be as soon as you wake up in the morning, or right before bed at night. As the
American Academy of Sleep Medicine research showed, meditating in the morning is proven
to help test subjects sleep at night. You’re creating a conscious neuro-pathway to relaxation, a
buffer against stress, and a profound sense of presence that will help you sleep better at night.”
That’s from Tip #16: Calm Your Inner Chatter.
This isn’t a news flash but we want to remember: We’re going to have a hard time falling asleep if
we’ve got drunk, crazy, hyperactive little monkeys swinging around in our heads.
We need to get REALLY good at flipping what Shawn calls the “off switch.”
Imagine that.
You’re up and on and rockin’ it during the day.
Then, you’re done. Shut down complete.
You flip the OFF switch.
And, as we discuss all the time, one of the best ways to build that off-switch muscle? Meditation.
(You check out Meditation 101 yet? Got a solid practice?)
Meditate in the morning to sleep well at night. Flip the off switch.
P.S. One of the things I do every.single.night is take 5 deep breaths (always 5!)—breathing in to
6, holding for 2 and then exhaling to 8. Nice, slow, deep breathing where I’m not thinking about
anything other than the count and deep breaths. I do that the moment I am flat on my back.
EVERY night. No thinking allowed—no matter what’s going on. I also do the exact same thing
to start every single one of my meditations (+ napitations)—grooving my consciousness to know
that when I take those 5 deep breaths everything shuts down. Period. It’s amazing.
Which leads us to the importance of rituals:

PhilosophersNotes | Sleep Smarter

5

HOW’S YOUR NIGHT-TIME RITUS?
“There is so much greatness

“The word ritual is derived from the Latin word ritus meaning ‘a proven way of doing

in you waiting to be shared,

something.’ A ritual is a small sequence of step-by-step actions that put you in a certain mood,

and it starts with passion,

state or frame of mind for getting something done. Whether or not you’ve had a history of sleep

consistency, and getting a

problems, a regular bedtime ritual will help you wind down and prepare your body for the best

great night’s sleep.”
~ Shawn Stevenson

sleep possible.
Jessica Alexandra of The Sleep Council stated, ‘A bedtime ritual teaches the brain to become
familiar with sleep times and wake times. It programs the brain and internal body clock to get
used to a set routine.”
That’s from the final Tip: Ritualize Your Night.
Did you know that the word ritual comes from the Latin ritus which means “a proven way of
doing something”? <— I love that!!
And, more importantly, do YOU have a PM ritual that you go through to help you get a great
night of sleep? We want to figure out what works then do it again and again remembering that a
great day starts the night before.
Ritus-style.
Check out Habits 101 for more on how to install habits that’ll help you rock it and have fun
experimenting with different things as you dial in 4% by 4% night after night—compounding
that goodness into deep, restorative sleep that sets you up to rock it day in and day out.
To smarter sleep and smarter living! :)

Brian Johnson,
Chief Philosopher

If you liked this Note,
you’ll probably like…
Power Sleep
The Power of Rest

About the Author of “Sleep Smarter”
SHAWN STEVENSON

Shawn Stevenson is the creator of The Model Health Show, featured as the
#1 Nutrition and Fitness podcast on itunes, and a leading health expert who’s

Take a Nap Change Your
Life

transformed the lives of thousands of people around the world. A graduate of The

Sleep for Success!

Shawn went on to be the founder of Advanced Integrative Health Alliance, a

University of Missouri - St. Louis with a background in biology and kinesiology,
successful company that provides Wellness Services for both individuals and
organizations worldwide. Shawn is a dynamic keynote speaker who has spoken
for TEDx, universities, and numerous organizations with outstanding reviews.
Connect: theshawnstevensonmodel.com.

About the Author of This Note
BRIAN JOHNSON

Brian Johnson loves helping people optimize their lives as he studies, embodies
and teaches the fundamentals of optimal living—integrating ancient wisdom
+ modern science + common sense + virtue + mastery + fun. Learn more and
optimize your life at brianjohnson.me.

6

PhilosophersNotes | Sleep Smarter

