Brian Johnson’s

PhilosophersNotes

TM

More Wisdom in Less Time

Brain Maker

THE BIG IDEAS

The Power of Gut Microbes to Heal and Protect Your Brain—for Life

The Power of Probiotics

BY DAVID PERLMUTTER, MD · LITTLE, BROWN © 2015 · 310 PAGES

Is huge.

Your Second Brain
In your gut.

Your Immune System
70-80% is in your gut.

Symptoms vs. Root Cause
Let’s focus on the root causes!

Small Gut Changes

= Shifts in perception of the world.

Diet

Plays the dominant role.

Top 2 Things to Avoid

Manufactured fructose + gluten.

6 Keys

“New, leading-edge science from the most well-respected institutions around the
world is discovering that to an extraordinary degree, brain health and, on the flip
side, brain diseases, are dictated by what goes on in the gut. That’s right: what’s
taking place in your intestines today is determining your risk for any number of
neurological conditions...
The digestive system is intimately connected to what goes on in the brain. And
perhaps the most important aspect of the gut that has everything to do with
your general wellness and mental health is its internal ecology—the various
microorganisms that live within it, especially the bacteria.”

To feeding your microbiome.

~ David Perlmutter, MD from Brain Maker
David Perlmutter has quickly become one of my favorite teachers.
This is the third Note we’ve created on his books. (Check out Power Up Your Brain + Grain
Brain for more goodness.)
As I mentioned in the Grain Brain intro, Perlmutter is the only medical doctor in the U.S. who is
both a board certified neurologist and a member of the American College of Nutrition.
In Brain Maker, he focuses his decades of wisdom in both neurology and nutrition on the
cutting-edge research that’s revealing the power of our gut microbes to heal and protect our

“We call this complex
internal ecology that thrives
within us and its genetic
fingerprint the microbiome
(micro for ‘small’ or
‘microscopic,’ biome
referring to a naturally
occurring community of
flora occupying a large
habitat—in this case, the
human body).”
~ David Perlmutter, MD

brain.
Perlmutter gives us an introduction to the importance of the trillions (!) of friendly little
microbes in our gut and then shares some simple practices we can adopt to optimize—showing
us how this new science can help everything from ADHD, asthma and autism to chronic fatigue,
mood disorders (including anxiety and depression), skin problems and obesity.
You can grab a copy of the book here. As with his other books, this one is packed with wisdom.
I’m excited to share a few of my favorite Big Ideas so let’s jump straight in!

THE POWER OF PROBIOTICS
“Much of what we know about the microbiome comes from studying so-called germ-free mice.
These are mice that have been altered to not have any gut bacteria, thereby allowing scientists
to study the effects of missing microbes or, conversely, exposing them to certain strains and
watching what happens. Germ-free lab rats have been shown, for example, to have acute
anxiety, an inability to handle stress, chronic gut and general inflammation, and lower levels
of an important brain-growth hormone called BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor). But
these symptoms can be reversed once the rats are fed a diet rich in Lactobacillus helveticus or
Bifidobacterium longum, two common probiotics.”
That’s nuts! Makes you want to go out and get some probiotics, eh? :)

1

PhilosophersNotes | Brain Maker

We have 100 trillion microbial friends who help keep us dialed in. Getting on good terms with
“The Greek physician and
father of modern medicine,
Hippocrates, first said in
the third century B.C.E., ‘All
disease begins in the gut.’”
~ David Perlmutter, MD

the right group of microbial critters is what the book is all about.
Before we explore some Big Ideas on how to optimize, let’s also say hello to our second brain:

YOUR SECOND BRAIN
“The neurons in the gut are so innumerable that many scientists are now calling the totality of
them ‘the second brain.’ Not only is this second brain regulating muscles, immune cells, and
hormones, but it’s also manufacturing something really important. Popular antidepressants
like Paxil, Zoloft, and Lexapro increase the availability of the ‘feel-good’ chemical serotonin in
the brain. You may be surprised to find out that an estimated 80 to 90 percent of the amount
of serotonin in your body is manufactured by the nerve cells in your gut! In fact, your gut’s
brain makes more serotonin—the master happiness molecule—than the brain in your head
does. Many neurologists and psychiatrists are now realizing that this may be one reasons why
antidepressants are often less effective in treating depression than dietary changes are. In
fact, recent research is revealing that our second brain may not be ‘second’ at all. It can act
independently from the main brain and control many functions without the brain’s input or
help.”
First, “neurons in the gut”?
I thought neurons were only in your brain. Hah! Apparently not. :)
I shared a similar idea about serotonin in our Note on Grain Brain. Every time I read about the
fact that 80 to 90 percent of our serotonin is produced IN OUR GUT I’m just blown away. Think
about that: 80 to 90 percent of our body’s “master happiness molecule” is produced in our gut.
80 to 90%!!!!!
*rubs eyes*
Do you think that our nutrition might just have a slight affect on our mood?
Answer: YES!!
Unequivocally.
Why every psychiatrist and psychotherapist in the world doesn’t start with nutrition rather than
traditional pharmacology befuddles me a bit. Thankfully, many do and it’s exciting to imagine
more and more energy placed here in the years ahead.
For now, know that the health of our gut has a huge impact on the health of our brain. If you
and/or someone you love struggles with mood issues, pick up the book and try out the approach.
You might just be blown away!

GUT = 70 TO 80% OF YOUR IMMUNE SYSTEM
“Your gut has its own immune system, the ‘gut-associated lymphatic tissue’ (GALT). It
represents 70 to 80 percent of your body’s total immune system. This speaks volumes about the
importance—and vulnerability—of your gut. If the events that take place in the gut weren’t so
critical to life, then the majority of your immune systems wouldn’t have to be there to guard and
protect it.
The reason most of your immune system is deployed in your gut is simple: the intestinal wall is
the border with the outside world. Aside from skin, it’s where your body has the most chances of
encountering foreign material and organisms. And it is in constant communication with every
other immune system cell in the body. If it meets a problematic substance in the gut, it alerts the
rest of the immune system to be on guard.”

2

PhilosophersNotes | Brain Maker

Alright. So, we know the gut produces 80 to 90% of your body’s serotonin and has so many
neurons that it qualifies as your “second brain.”
Got it.
Did you know that 70 to 80% of your IMMUNE SYSTEM is also in your gut?
Think about that for a moment as well.
The vast majority of your immune system IS IN YOUR GUT!
As Perlmutter tells us, “If the events that take place in the gut weren’t so critical to life, then the
majority of your immune systems wouldn’t have to be there to guard and protect it.”
Yet another data point to emphasize just how important it is for us to focus a proper amount of
energy on optimizing our good ol’ gut, eh?! :)

TREATING SYMPTOMS VS. ROOT CAUSES
“If you were to ask
someone on the street about

“By 2005, antidepressants had become the #1 prescribed drug class in the country.
But these medications do not treat depression. Whether it’s Prozac, Cymbalta, Zoloft, Elavil,

depression, you’d be likely

Lexapro, Wellburin, or any of the other commonly prescribed antidepressants, these medicines

to hear something along the

simply treat symptoms, and only minimally so... I am saddened by the fact that the billion-dollar

lines of ‘It’s a chemical

psychotropic pharmaceutical industry is predicated on the idea that people will take a pill to

imbalance in the brain.’ Well,

treat symptoms, while the underlying disorder is ignored. So there’s never any real focus on

I’m here to tell you that
that would be incorrect.

actually curing or even improving the root cause of the illness, let alone getting people off the
medication...

Two decades of scientific

All of the antidepressant medications currently on the market are designed to artificially alter

literature highlight the role

neurotransmitter activity in the brain. Yet, when we consider the fact that these same chemicals

of inflammation in mental

found in the brain are also produced in the gut, and that their availability to the brain is largely

illness, from depression to

governed by the activity of gut bacteria, we are forced to realize that ground zero for all things

schizophrenia.”

mood-related is the gut.”

~ David Perlmutter, MD

Several things to note here.
First, antidepressant medications are not actually treating depression. They’re treating
symptoms *not* the root cause.
As Perlmutter puts it “... they [anti-depressants] aren’t getting to the source of the problem and
putting out the fire. They are, in a sense, poorly constructed Band-Aids over cuts that won’t
heal.”
It’s kinda like putting ice cubes into a boiling pot of water. You might reduce the boil temporarily
but you’ll need to keep on dropping in ice cubes. It would be a lot more effective to focus on
turning off the flame that’s causing the water to boil, eh?
This isn’t just relegated to a discussion on depression. Perlmutter dedicates a chapter to
depression, obesity, and autism and touches on a range of other issues throughout the book.
He tells us that today more than 11 percent of kids are diagnosed as having ADHD. He reminds
us that it doesn’t just come out of nowhere.
But, if you go to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s website, “the homepage for
ADHD includes facts about symptoms and diagnosis, then moves right to treatment options,
none of which include a dietary protocol. There is not a single mention of prevention.”
Symptoms vs. root causes. Let’s focus on the root causes!
And, in this context, let’s focus on optimizing our microbiome! Here’s more on how to do that...

PhilosophersNotes | Brain Maker

3

SMALL GUT CHANGES —> CHANGES IN PERCEPTION OF WORLD
“We really have to pay
attention to how our gutsy

“A team of UCLA researchers conducted a nifty little experiment published in 2013, also in
the journal Gastroenterology, that produced some of the first evidence that friendly bacteria

tribes are fed and nurtured.

consumed from food can affect brain function in humans. Although it was a small study, it

We also have to ensure the

nonetheless got people in the medical community talking, because it basically showed how small

integrity of the gut lining.”
~ David Perlmutter, MD

changes in the gut bacteria affect how a person perceives the world.
Thirty-six women were split into three groups: Group 1 consumed, twice daily for four weeks, a
yogurt mixture containing several probiotics; Group 2 ate a dairy product that looked and tasted
like yogurt but didn’t have any probiotics; and Group 3 ate no specific product at all. At the
beginning of the study, each subject underwent a functional MRI (fMRI) scan of the brain that
was repeated after four weeks. Rather than looking at the structures of the brain, fMRI evaluates
brain activity so that researchers can determine which areas of the brain are active and how
active they are at any particular time. When we neurologists observe such activity, we technically
call it ‘excitability’—how the brain responds to stimuli or changes in the environment. At the
four-week point, participants were shown images designed to induce an emotional response.
Specifically, they viewed a series of pictures of angry or frightened people and matched them to
other faces showing the same emotions.
What the scientists found was truly remarkable. The women who ate the yogurt that contained
the probiotics showed decreased activity in both the insula and the somatosensory cortex during
the emotional reactivity task.”
Wow.
In short: Two servings of a probiotic yogurt per day for four weeks = significant changes in brain
activity.

“But what if being
overweight or obese has
less to do with willpower
or even genetic forces
and more to do with the
microbial profile in the gut?
What if we owe our obesity
challenges to a sick and
dysfunctional congregation
of intestinal bugs?”
~ David Perlmutter, MD

That’s simply amazing.
As Perlmutter says, “The fact that changes in our gut affect our brain’s response to negative
activity or emotionally stirring images is just mind-boggling.”
We recently did a Note on Richie Davidson’s great book The Emotional Life of Your Brain where
he talks about the neurological signature of your brain’s “emotional style.”
He demonstrated the power of meditation + cognitive behavior therapy + other means by which
we can optimize our brain’s “excitability.”
It’s truly mind-boggling to imagine the direct (and shockingly swift!) effect dialing in our
microbiome can have on our brain’s emotional expression.
Here’s to making that happen! :)

DIET PLAYS THE DOMINANT ROLE
“In a beautifully written and well-cited review of what we know so far about the complex dietgut-microbes-health equation, Canadian researchers stated the following: ‘Overall, dietary
changes could explain 57% of the total structural variation in gut microbiota whereas changes
in genetics accounted for no more than 12%. This indicates that diet has a dominating role in
shaping gut microbiota and changing key populations may transform healthy gut microbiota
into a disease-inducing entity.’
Let me repeat: Diet has the dominant role in shaping gut microbiota, and changing key
populations may transform healthy gut microbiota into a disease-inducing entity. If there’s
only one fact you take away from this book, that sentence is it.”
Want to take away one fact from the book that can change your life?

4

PhilosophersNotes | Brain Maker

“I can’t reiterate this
enough: The health and
variety of your belly’s bugs
directly depend on the foods
that you eat.”
~ David Perlmutter, MD

Here it is: “Diet has the dominant role in shaping gut microbiota, and changing key
populations may transform healthy gut microbiota into a disease-inducing entity.”
In short: Want a healthy body? Create a healthy gut. Do that via diet.

TOP 2 THINGS TO AVOID
“So what kind of diet makes for an optimal microbiome? I’ll get to all those details in chapter 9.
For now, let’s focus on the top two ingredients to avoid when it comes to preserving the health,
balance, and function of your belly bugs...
I like to tell patients that cleaning up their diet to nix gluten and manufactured fructose, while
limiting natural fructose from real fruit, is step 1 in preserving the health and function of their
microbiome and brain. Step 2, as you’re about to read, is managing exposures to chemicals and
drugs that can also have health implications—the focus of the next chapter.”
Check out the book for details on Perlmutter’s vision of an optimal diet. For now, keep in mind
the two things he recommends we eliminate: gluten + manufactured fructose.
In Grain Brain, Perlmutter goes into detail on the damaging effects of gluten—what he calls a
“silent killer.” (Remember: For 2.5 million years of evolution, we ate *very little* wheat + grains.
Now, the average American consumes 133 POUNDS of wheat alone. You think that’s optimal?)
Again, check out the book for more. And, if you haven’t already, consider eliminating gluten.
The next killer? Manufactured fructose.
Here’s what the good doctor has to say about it: “As I’ve mentioned, fructose has become one of
the most common sources of calories in the Western diet. Fructose is naturally found in fruit, but
that’s not where we’re getting it from; most of the fructose we consume is from manufactured
sources. Our caveman ancestors did eat fruit, but only during certain times of the year when
it was available; our bodies haven’t yet evolved to healthily manage the prodigious amounts of

“Make no mistake: blood
sugar regulation is priority #1
when it comes to preserving
brain function and resisting
Alzheimer’s disease.”
~ David Perlmutter, MD

fructose we consume today. Natural whole fruit has relatively little sugar when compared to, say,
a can of regular soda or concentrated juice. A medium-sized apple contains over 70 calories from
sugar in a fiber-rich blend; conversely, a 12-ounce can of regular soda contains twice that—140
calories of sugar. A 12-ounce glass of apple juice (no pulp) is about equal with the soda, clocking
in at the same number of sugar calories. Your body wouldn’t know the difference whether the
sugar came from a juiced batch of apples or a soda factory.”
How’s your sugar/fructose intake?
Time to swap out your soda + fruit juice with water? Good idea. :)
P.S. Perlmutter describes how your no-calorie, artificially sweetened sodas/beverages are also
wreaking havoc on your system. So, give your gut a break and drop those as well. Hah!

6 KEYS TO FEEDING YOUR MICROBIOME
“I am frequently asked how long it takes to rehabilitate a dysfunctional or underperforming
microbiome. Research shows that significant changes in the array of gut bacteria can take
place in as little as six days after instituting a new dietary protocol, like the one I present in this
chapter. But everyone is different; your Brain Maker rehab will depend on the current state of
your gut and how quickly you can fully commit to making changes.
The following are the six essential keys to sustaining a healthy microbiome, based on the latest
science.”
First: Know that we CAN change/rehabilitate an underperforming microbiome. That’s step 1 in
any change protocol—we need to KNOW that change is possible.

PhilosophersNotes | Brain Maker

5

And it’s super inspiring to know that we can see significant change in as little as six days!!
(Wow.) Perlmutter dedicates a chapter to unpacking the six keys to feeding our microbiome.
Here’s a super quick look:
Key #1: Choose foods rich in probiotics. Think: Fermented foods like sauerkraut, kimchi,
“At every crossway on
the road that leads to the
future, each progressive
spirit is opposed by a
thousand men assigned to
guard the past.”
~ Maurice Maeterlinck,
Belgian Nobel laureate

live-cultured yogurt, pickles, etc. Assemble your friendly gut bacteria army!
Key #2: Go low-carb, embrace high-quality fat. Perlmutter is a huge advocate of a
scientifically-based low-carb, high fat approach. I’ve personally experienced huge benefits in
adopting a similar approach. Brain Maker foods include vegetables (go leafy greens + friends!),
low-sugar fruit (like avocados, zucchini, squash, etc.), fermented foods, healthy fat (all things
coconut, olive oil, nuts + seeds, etc.), and protein (whole eggs, wild fish, grass-fed meat, etc.)
Key #3: Enjoy wine, tea, coffee, and chocolate. Yum!
Key #4: Choose foods rich in prebiotics. Find prebiotics in a variety of foods including
garlic, onion, leeks, jicama.
Key #5: Drink filtered water. Chlorine is one of the gut-busting toxins in our environment.
Solution: Filter!
Key #6: Fast every season. Perlmutter is a big fan of intermittent fasting. Think: Water-only
for a day every season!
... Well, there ya go! That’s a *super* quick look at this great book. I hope you enjoyed and I
hope I inspired you to think more deeply about how your diet and health of your gut is deeply
impacting your overall well-being. Get the book here and visit Dr. Perlmutter’s on the web here.
Here’s to optimizing!

Brian Johnson,
Chief Philosopher

If you liked this Note,
you’ll probably like…
Grain Brain
Power Up Your Brain
Clean Gut

About the Author of “Brain Maker”
DAVID PERLMUTTER, MD

David Perlmutter, MD, is a Board-Certified Neurologist; the president of the
Perlmutter Health Center in Naples, Florida; cofounder and president of the
Perlmutter Brain Foundation; and a Fellow of the American College of Nutrition.
He is the recipient of numerous awards, including the Humanitarian of the Year
Award from the American College of Nutrition and the Linus Pauling Award. Dr.
Perlmutter is also the author of The Better Brain Book, Raise a Smarter Child by
Kindergarten, and Power Up Your Brain. Connect at drperlmutter.com.

About the Author of This Note
BRIAN JOHNSON

Brian Johnson loves helping people optimize their lives as he studies, embodies
and teaches the fundamentals of optimal living—integrating ancient wisdom
+ modern science + common sense + virtue + mastery + fun. Learn more and
optimize your life at brianjohnson.me.

6

PhilosophersNotes | Brain Maker

