About the book
Fast This Way (2021) is not just another book touting the beneﬁts of fasting. Instead, it
uses the most up-to-date science and the author’s years of experience to outline
exactly how to sustainably fast for a long and healthy life.
About the author
Dave Asprey is a former tech entrepreneur, world-famous biohacker, and the founder of
Bulletproof CoLee. He has published multiple New York Times best sellers, including
The Bulletproof Diet and Headstrong.

Introduction
How to turn fasting into a state of mind.
You've probably heard that fasting is good for you. Promoted by lifestyle gurus and
backed up by countless studies, fasting really is a great way to clean up your insides,
lose weight and help your body run more eLiciently. Sounds great, except for the part
where you have to be starving all the time. But this assumption is wrong.
That's because fasting isn't about deprivation, but rather learning how to give your body
what it needs at the right time. In these insights, you'll learn how to break the deeprooted anxiety that tells you it's dangerous to skip a meal. And as you get better at going
without, you'll discover what it is you truly need.
Chapter 1 of 7
Fasting is about knowing what you need and taking control of it
All of us, at one point or another, have found ourselves hungry and craving… french
fries. But did you know that hunger and cravings are diLerent things? Hunger is a
biological message while cravings are a psychological need. And the junk food industry
peddling highly processed food has put a lot of eLort into convincing you they've got just
the thing to satisfy your craving.
So if you have a problem controlling unhealthy cravings, fasting might be a solution. But
fasting is neither a diet nor a lifestyle. Rather, fasting is a mindset. It means going
without. It's learning how to gain strength by saying no. The key message here is, fasting
is about knowing what you need and taking control of it.
By going without, you actually break the cycle of consumption and, in that space, give
yourself time to reﬂect. Do I really need that burger? That ﬁfth cup of coLee? That tenth
scroll through Instagram? Yes, even Instagram. It may seem unrelated, but in taking a
break from the instant gratiﬁcation of social media or whatever else you use to feel a

momentary escape, you'd be practicing what Cameron Seppa, a psychologist at the
University of California San Francisco, calls dopamine fasting.
Imagine how much stronger and calmer you'd feel if you could resist the pull of phone
alerts and endless scrolls to focus on a task that requires all your concentration. You
wouldn't be giving up social media entirely, of course, because fasting isn't about
quitting something forever. Rather, it's about self-control. A great example of this is
oxygen fasting. Sounds crazy, right? But athletes do it all the time.
They train in low-oxygen environments to build up lung capacity. Many forms of yoga,
too, extol the beneﬁts of breath control. It's important to note that although fasting can
be uncomfortable, it's not about suLering. With the right mindset, fasting can be a
joyous experience because you achieve a sense of power and control. Then, as you
continue to practice fasting, it just becomes, well, normal.
Chapter 2 of 7
Use intermittent fasting to help ease into “going without”
At this point, fasting might sound a bit scary. The thought of giving up food and social
media does sound anxiety-inducing. But that's the interesting thing about fasting. By
going without the things that give a momentary sense of comfort or familiarity, you
actually end up feeling stronger and more in control.
That's because you're not, in reality, giving something up. Rather, you're putting it on
hold while you create new habits. So, even though you might experience discomfort at
ﬁrst, remind yourself that it won't last forever. After more than 10 years of regular
fasting, the author recommends intermittent fasting as the best way to start. A popular
plan for beginners is the 16-8 fast, during which you restrict your eating window to just 8
hours of the day, say, 10am to 6pm, for instance. Not only is intermittent fasting pretty
easy to do because you can so readily adapt it to your lifestyle, but it also comes with a
host of health beneﬁts.
It helps regulate insulin levels. In taking a break from over-processed foods, your body
begins to feed oL of stored glucose and stops producing excess insulin. Fasting also
helps clear out toxins and pathogens by triggering autophagy, a process that, as recent
studies have shown, also slows aging and lowers inﬂammation. And inﬂammation is
key. You know how your body gets inﬂamed from, say, a mosquito bite? Well,
inﬂammation can also be triggered by food.
Unfortunately, low-quality processed foods tend to be packed with harmful agents,
leaving our bodies in a perpetual state of chronic inﬂammation. When our bodies have
to ﬁght this on a molecular level, we experience it as a loss of energy. And, in the long
run, chronic inﬂammation can lead to heart disease, diabetes, asthma, and more.
While all these health beneﬁts probably sound appealing, perhaps you're still nervous
about being a bit hangry in the morning. To cope, the author recommends starting the
day with a bulletproof coLee, black coLee, grass-fed butter, and a teaspoon of C8-MCT
oil. The fats in this concoction will keep you going throughout the morning, all while
maintaining your autophagic fasting state.

Chapter 3 of 7
To help your body thrive, develop an inconsistent fasting routine.
While insulin regulation, inﬂammation reduction, and autophagy all sound great on
paper, they're also molecular-level concepts. They aren't quite as tangible as promises
of a slimmer waistline, one of the easiest ways to gain self-esteem and a big reason
people turn to fasting in the ﬁrst place. But, again, fasting isn't dieting. Many weight-loss
diets rely on calorie reduction, as if every calorie from food is the same.
But 100 calories of salad is clearly healthier than the same serving of potato chips. And
dieting frequently doesn't address the underlying issue, the fact that your body can't
eLectively convert food into energy. Calorie-restricting diets can cause cravings.
Intermittent fasting teaches you when and how to eat. DiLerent types of fasts aLect you
in diLerent ways, as does the food you eat when you come out of the fast. That's why the
author suggests mixing up fasting lengths.
To understand why mixing up your routine is important, let's look at what happens
during the diLerent fasting stages. After your last meal, it takes anywhere from 4 to 16
hours before your body starts running on stored energy. At this point, your body starts
breaking down glycogen to produce glucose. This frees up adrenaline and cortisol and
gives you a boost of energy. If you do OMAD, or one meal a day, you'll be fasting even
longer. During OMAD, your body goes into fat-burning mode, activating a complex
process that converts stored fat into ketones that can be used for energy.
This won't just help you shed that unwanted weight. As one recent study found, ketosis
also leads to lower levels of triglycerides and higher levels of HDL cholesterol. That's the
good one. While those are great eLects, they're not sustainable.
If you do OMAD every day, sex hormones drop for both sexes, sleep quality is disturbed,
and hair begins to thin. That's why the author recommends mixing it up. A high-protein,
high-fat breakfast to start your week, a mix of OMAD and intermittent fasting on the
following days, and cheat days on the weekend. Sticking to this kind of routine not only
gets rid of those aching cravings, but also keeps your mind and body sharp by forcing it
to adapt to an inconsistent world.
Chapter 4 of 7
Healthy sleep supports your fasting – and healthy fasting supports your sleep
Isn't it funny that most people would rather skip a few hours of sleep than miss a meal?
While fasting for a few days won't kill you, going without sleep could. But while everyone
has felt the regenerative beneﬁts of a good night's sleep, did you know that getting 6.5 to
8 hours of sleep per night literally protects and heals you? It reduces the risk of cancer
and heart attacks, aids in cellular repair, and reduces inﬂammation in the brain as the
glymphatic system ﬂushes out cellular waste.
Best of all, that sleep time counts as fasting. And if you keep it going after you wake up,
human growth hormone – HGH – levels rise, which is great for burning fat and building
lean muscle mass. The key message here is, healthy sleep supports your fasting, and

healthy fasting supports your sleep. That's because your sleep cycle and your fasting
schedule work in harmony with each other. For instance, if you eat too late, you'll still be
digesting when you go to bed, which interferes with your circadian rhythm. And sleeping
with elevated glucose and insulin levels will likely cause you to wake up periodically
during the night, and then be groggy the next day.
A recent University of California San Diego study has shown that a three-hour window
between eating and going to bed signiﬁcantly reduces the levels of blood sugar. If your
sleep and fasting are in sync, that means closing your eating window at 8pm and going
to bed after 11pm, for example. A pretty manageable schedule. On top of not eating too
late, you can help keep your circadian rhythm on track by reducing your exposure to
artiﬁcial light in the hours before bed. So dim the lights around the house, and yes, turn
oL your TV, laptop, and cell phone. All of these things trigger the release of hormones
that keep you awake.
Last, try to remember that establishing a new routine is challenging, so go easy on
yourself. In the early stages of fasting, you might experience sleep disruptions or make
dinner plans that get in the way of your evening rhythm. After all, you still have a life. If
anything, that late-night dinner might prove to you exactly why you shouldn't eat before
bedtime.
Chapter 5 of 7
Metabolic ﬂexibility helps you power through gym sessions on fasting days.
As we've seen, fasting not only helps you confront your fears of not having all the things
you swore you couldn't live without, it actually helps you thrive. And the more your mind
and body obey you, the stronger you become. Next, it's time to hit the gym. Maybe that
sounds impossible on an empty stomach, especially if you rely on sugary sports drinks
to get through a gym session or practice carb-loading the night before a workout.
But it's actually harder to lose weight when your body is still relying on glucose for
energy. Luckily, through intermittent fasting, you've practiced harnessing your power on
a metabolic level. And by switching up your fasting routine, you've trained your body to
be metabolically ﬂexible by going between burning sugar and burning fat. The key
message is, metabolic ﬂexibility helps you power through gym sessions on fasting days.
Believe it or not, unpredictability is actually good for your cells. The body likes to run on
sugar, but when sugar isn't available, it'll switch to a ketone fat-burning mode.
And the more you toggle between the two states, the more your cell structures get used
to metabolizing energy from either one. Running oL fat reserves is actually a great thing.
Not only do you slim up, but fat molecules have more energy than carbohydrates. Good
fats are also anti-inﬂammatory, which helps take the edge oL exercise-related aches
and pains. And they're hydrating. After you exercise and it's time to break your fast, feel
free to eat a healthy amount of carbs.
In fact, it ﬁts the pattern of rapid change between the two metabolic states, which
makes your body stronger. Another trick that helps your metabolic ﬂexibility is hot-cold
therapy. Try standing under a stream of cold water at the end of your shower. You'll hate

it for a few days, but soon enough, the modest stress provided by the cold water will
increase cardiolipin, and your body will generate more heat. Research has shown that
cold therapy improves your mood, boosts the immune system, relieves pain, and aids
with weight loss. Lastly, don't get obsessed with looking like the bodies you see on TV.
Before shooting a shirts-oL scene, those actors had to fast for days and take diuretics.
Trying to look like that all the time would likely kill you. Instead, treat your body well with
good food, exercise and sleep, all of which help you maintain a healthy and realistic
image of what it should look like.
Chapter 6 of 7
Women need to develop a fasting plan tailored to their needs.
While fasting has many beneﬁts, it's not a one-size-ﬁts-all solution. You'll probably need
to experiment a little as you hone your process. This is especially true for women. Since
an astounding amount of fasting plans and medical studies still use men as their
baseline, what works best for women's bodies is, unfortunately, not often talked about.
Obviously, men and women are diLerent, and nothing underscores this diLerence more
than women's reproductive ability. This is precisely what makes them more sensitive to
fasting. That's because when a woman's amygdala thinks her reproductive capabilities
are threatened, it causes a stress response that restricts hormones to maintain her
body's resources. In fact, as the author reports, women who did too much intermittent
fasting experienced sleep problems, hair loss, irregular periods, and sometimes even
temporary infertility. This is the key message. Women need to develop a fasting plan
tailored to their needs.
The main strategy is to take it easy. Don't do too much at once. Limit intermittent fasting
to every other day, or ease into it by starting with only 14 hours instead of 16. The author
suggests saving strenuous, high-intensity workouts for non-fasting days. And
bulletproof coLee can help relieve some of the bodily stress caused by fasting. These
aren't hard and fast rules, but rather suggestions to prevent your body from triggering
famine stress.
If you do still ﬁnd yourself feeling stressed or craving fatty, salty foods, adding some
Himalayan salt and grass-fed butter to your diet could help ease the cravings. The
author also advises women to pay special attention to iron, as low levels can cause
fatigue and disrupt menstrual cycles. Finally, the author strongly advises consulting
your doctor before doing any fasting. This is particularly true if you're breastfeeding,
planning to get pregnant, or are experiencing fertility issues. Also be sure to check with a
doctor if you have irregular periods, are underweight, or have a history with eating
disorders. And, of course, never fast if you're pregnant.
While the beneﬁts of fasting can be just as plentiful for women as for men, women do
need to be a little more careful. So just ease into it slowly and be mindful of your diet,
supplements, and stress levels. In short, pay attention to what your body is telling you.

Chapter 7 of 7
Fasting allows you to discover yourself beyond ﬂesh and blood.
Soon after you start fasting, you'll start to notice some diLerences. Perhaps you'll
become more aware of your unconscious thinking around food, like the cravings
triggered by stress. And with this awareness, maybe you'll realize that hunger is just a
feeling, and not always a rational one. But think beyond the physical.
For instance, maybe your senses will become hyper-aware. Food might smell more
delicious. The colors of your salad might, at times, seem more vivid. Fasting alters how
you see the world around you, which is why it's a pillar of most religious and spiritual
practices, from Christianity to Judaism, Islam to Buddhism. And for many adherents,
going without is not only an expression of self-discipline and sacriﬁce, but also a path
for greater communion with the world around them. This is the key message.
Fasting allows you to discover yourself beyond ﬂesh and blood. So consider it
meditating on a physical level, and enjoy it. In fact, embracing that joy is key to the
spirituality of fasting. Because while fasting is about self-discipline, it isn't about pain.
And actually, pleasure is quite an important factor in the process. This is the perfect
time to mention that orgasms, during an extended fast, are likely to be more intense for
both sexes.
However, if you're a man, keep in mind that testosterone drops the day after ejaculation.
Echoing this, Taoists teach that men shouldn't deplete themselves by ejaculating. At the
same time, they urge women to climax freely and fully. As a ﬁnal piece of advice, be sure
to avoid self-judgment.
Maybe you planned to epic a fast, or maybe some unforeseen stressor came up during
the day, and suddenly you've got a cookie in your mouth. Don't beat yourself up.
Instead, consider that your fast has exposed a spiritual toxin, like perfectionism or being
too rigid. So just enjoy the cookie as you continue along the path.
Final summary
The key message in these insights is that fasting isn't about suLering or starvation.
Instead, it's a way to reduce the biological noise on a cellular level and turn down the
noise on a consciousness level. Ultimately, fasting is a practice of self-discipline, of
learning how to go without so that you can understand what you really need. And here's
some more actionable advice.
Try fasting from hate. Spend one day without directing any hateful thoughts toward
anyone or anything. Doing so will probably make you aware of all of the negativity
surrounding you, whether out in the world or on social media. If hate does enter your
mind, practice thinking something positive about whatever your negative feelings were
directed at.

