About the book
The Joy of Movement (2019) makes an inspired and highly original case for exercise.
Drawing on the latest insights from biology, neuroscience, and evolutionary psychology,
author Kelly McGonigal sets out to show us that the beneﬁts of exercise go far beyond
improving our physical health. With hard science and real-life anecdotes, she illustrates
how movement brings us hope, meaning, and connection – and explains how everyone
can harness its positive powers.
About the author
Kelly McGonigal is a research psychologist and award-winning science writer. Besides
lecturing at Stanford University, she’s also a group exercise instructor in the San
Francisco Bay Area. Her writing on neuroscience, psychology, and exercise has been
published in twenty-eight languages, and her previous book, The Willpower Instinct, has
become an international bestseller.
Introduction
Kelly McGonigal The Joy of Movement How exercise helps us ﬁnd happiness, hope,
connection, and courage. If you're someone who works out regularly, you might have
observed how the beneﬁts of exercising carry over into day-to-day life. Yoga, for
example, can teach us to take a deep breath in stressful situations. From dancing, we
learn that a good mood can be infectious.
And a hard cardio session teaches us that a racing heart isn't always a sign of fear. And
that's not all. A single good workout can instantly change your mood, make you feel
stronger and more conﬁdent and bring you closer to the people you exercise with. The
mental health beneﬁts of exercise are undeniable and they apply whether your
preferred physical activity is running, weightlifting, or swimming, whether you're an
amateur or a pro athlete. These insights will shed light on how and why physical activity
aUects your mood, your sense of purpose, and your self-perception and show you that
movement is a key factor in human happiness. By the end, you'll have all the more
reason and inspiration to get moving.
Chapter 1 of 7
The high we experience from physical exertion is an ancient mechanism helping us
persist, thrive, and socialize.
As early as 1885, Scottish philosopher Alexander Bain described what we now call the
runner's high, the feeling of bliss and elation that sets in after a prolonged period of

jogging. Bain likened this high to a spiritual experience, but others have compared it to
being in love and to the eUects of all kinds of mind-altering drugs.
Curiously, from a neurological standpoint, the drug that the runner's high comes closest
to is cannabis. Recent studies have shown that a long run greatly increases levels of
endocannabinoids in our brain. These are a class of chemicals, and cannabis mimics
the eUects of them on our brain. Endocannabinoids are known for lessening pain,
boosting mood, and triggering additional feel-good chemicals and neurotransmitters
such as dopamine and endorphins. Endocannabinoids also help protect us against
anxiety and depression. The weight loss drug remonibant, for example, was designed to
suppress appetite by blocking endocannabinoid receptors.
Instead, it brought about dramatic increases in anxiety and depression in clinical trials,
even leading to four suicides, and was permanently banned. Conversely, one recent
study showed that just 30 minutes of exercise can make people immune to the severe
anxiety induced by the drug CCK4. In this study, the eUect of exercise was equivalent to
taking a sedative like Ativan. And that's not all. Endocannabinoids also make us more
social. In one experiment conducted by researchers at the Sapienza University of Rome,
people who exercised for 30 minutes before playing a social game were much more
generous and cooperative than people who didn't.
Initiatives like Good Gym in London harness the social energy generated by physical
activity. They organize communal runs that send volunteers to do all sorts of social
projects in their communities such as visiting socially isolated elderly people. Luckily
for those of us who'd rather eat a broom than run a lap around the block, the runner's
high is not conﬁned to running. It is proven to appear after all kinds of moderately
exhausting physical activity that takes more than 20 minutes, whether that's swimming,
cycling, or speed walking. Thus, the explosion of brain chemicals from prolonged
exercise might be more accurately called a persistence high. Why would our brains
make us feel so good about exhausting our bodies?
The latest theory traces this phenomenon back to our earliest ancestors. It's likely that
the persistence high evolved to keep us hunting and gathering for longer periods of time,
making us more likely to ﬁnd food and survive. And the increased willingness to
cooperate and share after physical exertion could also have had an evolutionary
beneﬁt. It made hunters more likely to share their spoils with the tribe.
Chapter 2 of 7
The human brain can get hooked on exercise in a way that resembles a drug
addiction but with much more positive outcomes.
When researchers ﬁrst started studying the phenomenon of exercise dependence in the
late 1960s, they ran into a big problem. No matter how much money they oUered, they
couldn't ﬁnd any regular exercisers willing to see what would happen if they stopped
exercising for a while.

And if they did sign up, participants tended to cheat and lie, pretending that they hadn't
worked out when they had. This anecdote illustrates that the persistence high people
get from endurance sports isn't the only way exercise can be likened to drugs. Because
it activates our brain's reward system in similar ways to substances like cocaine and
heroin, stimulating the release of feel-good chemicals like endocannabinoids,
dopamine, endorphins, and noradrenaline, regular physical activity can be just as
addictive as those substances. For self-described exercise junkies, for example,
missing a single workout can increase anxiety and irritability. And after several missed
workouts, many of them report signs of depression and insomnia. They also show the
same attentional bias as other addicts.
When shown images of people working out, the brain of an exercise junkie ﬁres up in the
same way as when you show cigarettes to a smoker. However, there are some important
ways in which exercise dependence diUers from other habit-forming addictions. First of
all, it takes our brain longer to get hooked on exercise than on drugs, because the
chemical changes that physical activity aUect in our brain are less intense and happen
more slowly. For example, mice who are made to exercise each day for two weeks do
not show symptoms of exercise addiction afterwards. But after six weeks, something in
their brain seems to ﬂip, and even with no one forcing or rewarding them, they can
hardly stop running. Similar studies on humans show that we tend to get hooked on
exercise after exercising four times a week for six weeks.
As with other drugs, regularly getting high on physical activity slowly changes the
chemical structure of your brain. But the great thing is that instead of making you less
sensitive to its positive eUects as happens with chemical drugs, regular exercise makes
you more sensitive to them. This happens because exercise increases the receptors for
endocannabinoids in your brain and makes dopamine cells more responsive. This is
why, in stark contrast to drugs, the more exercise you do, the better you feel about it.
Chapter 3 of 7
Humans are hardwired to derive pleasure from synchronized physical activity.
Fitness trends come and go, but if you observe them closely, you will discover that many
recent exercise crazes share a similar format. They supercharge an already existing
activity by adding synchronized movement and community spirit. Consider Tae Bo, for
example, which adds elements of dance choreography to boxing.
Or soul cycling, which brings a social, almost spiritual element to the lone sport of
indoor cycling. Since the beginning of history, humans have gathered to move together.
First in all kinds of social, pagan, or religious rituals, nowadays in group exercise
classes. As anthropologists have observed all over the world, moving in unison seems
to make people feel more connected to each other but also to something bigger than
themselves. French sociologist Emile Durkheim called the joyful self-transcendence
humans can derive from moving together collective eUervescence. Synchrony seems to
be a key factor in producing such collective joy.

In fact, synchronizing physical activity with others seems to be an ancient human reﬂex.
When we feel close to a person, for example, our breathing, heartbeats, and even brain
activity tend to automatically align themselves. And we are actually better at
synchronizing with another person's slightly irregular beat than with a perfect computergenerated rhythm. The reason why this has such a powerful eUect on our psyche can be
explained through a process called proprioception, by which our brain senses what our
body is doing in space. When we move, our body is constantly sending feedback to our
brain about the movement. And when we see others performing the same movements
that we feel ourselves doing, our brain assimilates these sensations into a very
satisfying perception of oneness.
As your fellow humans begin to seem like a part of yourself, you also become more
likely to share and cooperate with them. The bonding eUect of moving in synchrony can
be demonstrated in babies as young as 14 months old. One study showed that babies
are more likely to help a stranger pick up dropped pencils after they had bounced to
music in sync with that person. Reducing our individual limitations and increasing
mutual trust seem to be the main functions of synchronized movement, and it's
probably why humans employ it in so many social, religious, or military rituals. Whether
it's a hunter-gatherer tribe performing a dance ritual or college students in a Pilates
class, synchronized movement helps us leave our egos behind and bond with people
we are not related to.
Chapter 4 of 7
Music is a performance-enhancing drug
Some exercise scientists could convincingly argue that when Ethiopian Haile
Gebrselassie broke the world record on the 2,000-meter race during a U.S. running
competition in 1998, he was actually on a performance-enhancing drug. Earlier that
day, Gebrselassie had managed to convince event organizers to play the pop song
Scatman during the race, one of his favorite songs and the song he had trained to. When
he heard the familiar upbeat melody play over the giant stadium speakers, Gebrselassie
was able to run faster than he ever had before.
The power of music to push us beyond our physical limits can hardly be overstated.
Musicologists have long described music as ergogenic or work-enhancing, and science
is ﬁnding more and more evidence to back up this claim. One recent study found that
people who listen to music during their workouts consume less oxygen than those who
don't. And even patients with high blood pressure last 51 seconds longer during a
cardiovascular stress test when they are allowed to run on the treadmill to their favorite
tunes. Costis Karagiorgis has made a career out of the performance-enhancing powers
of music. His job is to curate workout playlists for some of the world's best athletes.
A trained sports psychologist, he explains that the best workout songs usually have a
strong, energetic beat, a tempo of 120 to 140 beats per minute, and motivational lyrics
that include words such as work, go, or run. Eminem's Till I Collapse, for instance,
estimated to be the most popular workout song of all time, ticks almost all of these
boxes. Such positive, familiar songs have the power to deliver us an extra burst of feel-

good chemicals like adrenaline, dopamine, and endorphins during our workout.
Workout melodies and inspirational lyrics can also help us frame physical discomfort in
a more positive way. Humans' deep-seated urge to move to music has even led to
medical miracles. Famous neurologist Oliver Sacks liked to tell the story of a woman
whose leg was paralyzed after a complex bone fracture.
Doctors believed that the communication between her leg muscles and her spinal cord
had been cut completely. But when she heard her favorite Irish jig, her foot
spontaneously started tapping. Accessing muscle memory with music therapy, the
woman learned to walk again.
Chapter 5 of 7
Exercise can fundamentally change our perception of ourselves.
At Tough Mudder, an annual obstacle marathon that now happens all over the world,
participants face terrifying physical obstacles with names such as Arctic Enema, Boa
Constrictor, or Ladder to Hell. For the ﬁnal obstacle on the course, electroshock
therapy, participants have to run through curtains of wires electriﬁed with up to 10,000
volts.
Why, you might ask yourself, would anyone subject themselves to such torture? Well,
facing our fears by overcoming physical challenges can completely transform our
understanding of what we are capable of and become a tremendous source of
empowerment. The self-stated goal of the people who come up with the Tough Mudder
obstacles is not to torture people, but to create challenges that encourage them to
overcome common phobias of height, of cold, of conﬁned spaces, and provide them
with a sense of conﬁdence, bravery, and camaraderie. Psychologically, the key to
transforming fear into courage seems to be giving subjects an element of control. When
rats are shocked by an experimenter with no control over when or for how long the
shocks are delivered, they become helpless, traumatized, and depressed. But when
they are given the ability to turn oU the shocks by turning a wheel, they bravely learn to
do so and become more resilient to future stress in the process.
Similarly, humans grow with their challenges. DPI Adaptive Fitness in Fairfax, Virginia is
a gym specializing in training those with physical constraints or disabilities. When
trainees ﬁrst come in, their trainer encourages them to set themselves a goal so high
that many believe they will never achieve it. For example, when Joana Bonilla ﬁrst
arrived at DPI, she had just lost the use of her legs due to the autoimmune disease
lupus. She thought she would never be able to drive again. With her trainer, she set the
goal of being able to throw 100 punches in 30 seconds, which would help her develop
enough upper body strength to heave herself from her wheelchair into a car.
After just three months of training, Joana was able to meet the goal and just a few weeks
later she bought a new car. Since your body is constantly sending feedback to your
brain, mastering an uncomfortable, impossible-seeming physical challenge can literally
transform your sense of self. Performing a powerful feat, for example, sends a message

to your brain that you are powerful. In this way, exercise can challenge even our most
deeply held beliefs about ourselves, as many DPI trainees can attest.
Chapter 6 of 7
“Green exercise” taps into the ancient human desire to connect with nature.
Now that you've learned about the numerous positive eUects that movement has on our
mental health, would you like to know what's even better for your brain than exercise?
Exercising outside.
Nature has the power to ﬁll us with wonder and awe, give us a sense of belonging, and
make us more alert. Combined with physical activity, it has tremendous positive eUects
on our mental health. For example, within just ﬁve minutes of green exercise, as it's
sometimes called, people report major positive changes in their mood and outlook. If
you're wondering why, just remember that the human brain evolved over a long period of
time, most of which humans spent outdoors running, walking, and foraging for food.
Indeed, brain scans show that our default brain state is diUerent outdoors than it is
indoors. Indoors, where Americans now spend an average 93% of their time, our default
state shows activation in the brain areas responsible for memory, language, and social
interaction, and slightly leans toward negativity, which is why we're more likely to
engage in rumination, self-criticism, or worry indoors.
But when we're in nature, our default brain state more closely resembles the calm,
disengaged state achieved by experienced meditators. We experience less anxiety, are
more aware of our surroundings, and slip into a state researchers call soft fascination.
Psychologist Alexandra Rosati believes that these two diUerent states of the human
brain – indoors and outdoors, ruminating and mindful – correspond to two diUerent
types of cognition that were crucial to our ancestors' survival. The ruminating state is
the outcome of the evolution of social cognition, our ability to think about other people
and cooperate within small groups. The mindful state derives from foraging cognition,
our ability to be alert when hunting and gathering for food. Naturally, the latter is brought
out best when we are outdoors.
People who feel connected to nature tend to spend more time in this foraging condition
and perhaps, as a consequence, experience greater life satisfaction, purpose, and
happiness. They are also less likely to be depressed and anxious. The Green Gym
Initiative in the UK makes use of the joy we derive from movement and nature by
sending volunteers to do nature-based activities with a social focus, such as planting
community gardens. Researchers at the University of Westminster showed that after
eight weeks of the program, Green Gym volunteers showed a 20% increase in their
cortisol awakening response, the hormonal boost that gets us up and going in the
morning and which is often suppressed in depressed people.
Chapter 7 of 7
Enduring physical hardships trains mental strength

If running a marathon isn't challenging enough for you, you can always sign up for an
ultramarathon. That's any marathon lasting over six hours, though some of them can
last several weeks. The Iditarod Trail Invitational, for example, includes walking, biking,
and skiing through Alaskan blizzards for up to 30 days. Since 1980, the number of
Americans who have completed such extreme endurance feats jumped from 650 to
79,000 in 2017.
What draws people to these crazy adventures? For Sean Bearden, host of a popular
podcast on ultra-running, endurance sport was a way out of his depression. He explains
that training his body to endure such extreme physical hardship is a way to cultivate
mental strength that carries over to other parts of his life. For example, during the race,
Bearden tries to focus on the present moment and draws strength from thinking about
his loved ones, skills that have also helped him manage his depression. Endurance
athletes like Bearden do not necessarily seek out their sport because they are extremely
resilient, but because the sport trains them to become extremely resilient. In fact,
histories of depression, addiction, and anxiety are common among the world's top
ultra-runners.
In 2015, when researchers followed athletes competing in the Yukon Arctic Ultra, they
found that the athlete's ability to soldier on through extreme conditions was linked to
very high levels of the hormone irazin. Irazin is best known for helping our bodies burn
fat as fuel, but it also stimulates the brain's reward system, acting as a natural
motivation booster and antidepressant. Depression in the bloodstreams of participating
athletes was highly elevated before the marathon and climbed even higher during it.
Irazin belongs to a class of proteins called myokines, which are manufactured by our
muscles during physical activity. Myokines are known to boost our physical and
cognitive performance, alleviate pain, reduce depression and inﬂammation, and even
kill cancer cells. Because they can protect the brain from some of the
neurodegenerative symptoms of conditions such as depression and Parkinson's,
scientists have started calling these beneﬁcial proteins HOPE molecules.
Exercising at such high intensity and volume as extreme endurance athletes can
stimulate intense bursts of myokine release. But you don't need to be an ultra-runner to
harness the positive powers of the HOPE molecules. A single hour of biking is enough to
release about 35 diUerent myokines into your bloodstream. As these insights have
hopefully shown, the myriad beneﬁts of physical activity are available to all of us. As
humans, we are hardwired to ﬁnd happiness in movement.
Final summary
The key message is that for humans, the beneﬁts of exercise extend far beyond
improving our physical health. Because of our evolutionary history as hunters and
gatherers, human brains are hardwired to derive happiness, meaning, and a sense of
belonging from physical activity, especially if that physical activity takes place to music,
in nature, or alongside others. The many diUerent brain chemicals released during
exercise have been shown to reduce anxiety and depression, alleviate the physical and
mental symptoms of various illnesses, and make us more likely to trust and support
each other.

