Rating

9

Qualities
Scientific
Applicable
Eye Opening

Why We Sleep

Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams
Matthew Walker | Scribner, 2017

Curious about Why We Sleep? Read our review below. While we’re awaiting the copyright
holder’s go-ahead to summarize this book in our usual summary format, we hope you’ll
find our review just as helpful.

Review
Matthew Walker – a neuroscientist and director of UC Berkeley’s Sleep and Neuroimaging Lab –
offers a readable if sometimes scary survey of modern sleep research. Sleep facilitates memory,
creativity, problem solving and the acquisition of motor skills. It recharges the immune system,
modulates blood sugar, clears coronary arteries and wards off disease. Most adults in the
industrialized world fall short of the recommended amount of sleep. Modern life – and its lights,
air travel, caffeine, alcohol and expanding workday – adversely affects sleep. The results include
impaired memory, decreased productivity and drowsy drivers. getAbstract recommends Walker’s
important overview to nearly everyone, especially managers who subscribe to the you-snooze-youlose work ethic.
Dr. Walker is a man on a mission. He wants to get you and everybody else to sleep more. Walker
lays out in terrifying detail how even minimal amounts of sleep loss can have devastating effects
on your physical and mental health. Ironically, his data-rich horror stories are enough to keep
you up at night – but to excellent purpose. Walker also offers reassuring evidence of how a good
night’s sleep will enhance your well-being, and he offers practical advice on how to fall asleep.
Walker is a neuroscientist; that is, he’s a scientist. So his mind-set is one of discovering and
imparting facts, which he presents with great clarity and in great number. Many of his facts
www.getabstract.com

LoginContext[cu=387247,asp=2461,subs=5,free=0,lo=en,co=BG] 2020-04-03 10:52:26 CEST

stand alone and provide insight. Others function as metaphors to illuminate additional facts or
to serve as bridges between crucial points. Walker varies his approach with a skill that keeps his
informative prose readable and engaging.
Happily, even though he’s clearly a facts-first writer, Walker brings his data into the realm of
emotion and humanity. Sleep is a messy, personal matter; nobody sleeps like anybody else. And
yet Walker’s research reveals broader, connective points and themes. He delves into existing
research with diligence. While giving every study cited the credit it warrants, Walker never
obscures his information or its interpretation with endless detail from every study’s processes.
This enhances his readability and makes his most salient facts easy to retain and, crucially, easy to
tell apart.
Walker shows real compassion when writing about insomnia. He describes it as the curse it is and
pays particular attention to how the elderly wrestle with a vicious cycle of nighttime wakefulness
and early evening dozing that many mistake for insomnia. Walker is an anomaly – a scientist who
never loses sight of the human component of what he researches.
He offers these lessons and insights:

1. Sleep is a true panacea.
A full night of high quality sleep refreshes the immune system, moderates appetite and
supports the digestive system. Walker says that when you sleep well, you increase your ability
to learn, to retain memories and to make decisions. He asserts that the right amount of sleep
nourishes emotional balance and creativity.

2. Sleep deprivation is dangerous.
The latest research makes it clear that not getting enough sleep causes your heartbeat to
accelerate, increases your blood pressure and degrades the health of your coronary arteries.
Walker details how lack of sleep compromises the immune system, especially causing the loss
of vital cancer-fighting “natural killer cells.” Even minimal amounts of sleep deprivation wreak
havoc with your ability to focus and concentrate. Such inattention can become life-threatening
when it affects drivers or health care professionals. Walker cites sleep loss as a factor in the obesity
epidemic. Sleep moderates appetite, and people with little sleep tend to crave and eat more. They
are more likely to want sweets, high-carbohydrate foods and salty treats. Walker also discusses
the role sleep deprivation plays in enhancing every psychiatric malady, including depression,
anxiety and bipolar disorder.

3. The circadian rhythm gives your brain the signals.
Your body has two processes for telling you when to sleep. Walker describes an internal clock, the
circadian rhythm, that tells the brain whether it is day or night. The brain follows the circadian
www.getabstract.com

2 of 5

LoginContext[cu=387247,asp=2461,subs=5,free=0,lo=en,co=BG] 2020-04-03 10:52:26 CEST

rhythm to regulate bodily processes and chemicals. Your circadian rhythm supports wakefulness
in the morning and drowsiness at night. Daytime alertness increases throughout the morning
and reaches a peak in the early afternoon. When the sun goes down, the brain begins to make
the transition to sleepiness by releasing the hormone melatonin. Walker points out that contrary
to popular belief, melatonin doesn’t, on its own, induce sleep. Instead, it acts as a signal that
tells the brain when it is night and when the brain should initiate the processes that generate
sleep. Walker identifies the second bodily mechanism as “sleep pressure;” it involves the hormone
adenosine, which builds up in the brain throughout the day. When adenosine achieves a certain
concentration, it brings on feelings of sleepiness.

4. Two major phases of sleep offer different benefits.
Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is also called “dream sleep.” During this phase, a sleeper’s eyes
shift quickly from side to side. REM sleep produces brain-wave activity that quite like that of the
brain when awake. All other phases of sleep are called non-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep.
During NREM sleep, the brain produces steady, rhythmic waves that differ from both the REM
phase and the waking brain.

5. Most people don’t get enough sleep.
Walker expresses concern that two-thirds of the adults in developed nations fall short of the ideal
of achieving at least seven to nine hours of sleep a night. The nations with the largest declines
in sleep times – including the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and South Korea
– have also experienced the largest increases in diseases such as cardiovascular disease, cancer,
Alzheimer’s disease and depression. Walker notes that the World Health Organization describes
sleep loss as epidemic in the industrialized world.

6. Blame modern life.
Walker asserts that many of the technological advances that have made life more convenient
also produce the side effect of undermining natural sleep. One of the most potent obstacles
to healthful, sound sleep is artificial light, which upsets the body’s natural responses to
daylight and darkness. Walker details how the introduction of new light bulbs that incorporate
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have made this situation much worse. LEDs – found in laptop
screens, smartphones and tablets – emit a short-wavelength blue light that’s twice as potent as
incandescent light in damping down the body’s release of melatonin. Jet travel also plays havoc
with your circadian rhythm, notably when you arrive in a new time zone. Walker explains that
your body continues to follow the circadian clock it set in your previous time zone. He cites studies
that found that frequent time-zone hoppers, such as airline crew members, suffer weakened shortterm memory and higher rates of cancer and Type 2 diabetes than the general population.

www.getabstract.com

3 of 5

LoginContext[cu=387247,asp=2461,subs=5,free=0,lo=en,co=BG] 2020-04-03 10:52:26 CEST

7. Caffeine and alcohol degrade sleep.
Caffeine interferes with the sleep-inducing signals in your brain. Caffeine tricks your body into
thinking it’s not drowsy, and it remains in your system for a long time, up to six hours or so after
a cup of coffee. Alcohol sedates the brain. Drink enough, Walker says, and you easily drift into a
state of unconsciousness. Unfortunately, this alcohol-induced state of mind isn’t natural sleep.
Furthermore, alcohol-induced sleep isn’t continuous, instead, it causes repeated awakenings to
puncture your night’s sleep. Alcohol also suppresses REM sleep.

8. Sleep plays a major role in memory.
A good night’s sleep preserves new memories from your day and integrates them with your
existing store of knowledge. Sleep also prepares your brain for acquiring new memories on the
following day. When you learn a new fact, the brain processes it as a short-term memory in
its hippocampi, which have limited capacity. During NREM sleep, the brain moves the memories
from the hippocampus to the greater-capacity cortex for long-term storage. Walker describes
the process as analogous to transferring data from a memory stick to a computer’s hard
drive. However, the brain is capable of greater discernment about data than the best computer.
During NREM sleep, the brain decides which information is worth preserving and which it can
prune away.

9. Sleeping pills aren’t the best solution to sleeplessness.
Walker isn’t a fan of sleeping pills, maintaining that they don’t produce a natural sleep. Instead,
he teaches, pills produce a sedative effect similar to that of alcohol. Sleeping pills also have
unpleasant side effects that show up the next day, such as sluggishness, forgetfulness and slow
reaction times. Walker is much more bullish on new nondrug sleep therapies, such as “cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia” (CBT-I). Over several weeks, the patient and a therapist work on
a program to address bad sleep habits and the underlying anxieties that may deter sleep. Walker
describes how, in 2016, the American College of Physicians concluded that CBT-I – not sleeping
pills – should be the first-line treatment for insomnia.

10. Practice good “sleep hygiene.”
If you have trouble falling asleep, you can improve your sleep by following some smart sleep
practices. Walker says the first and most effective step is to stick to a schedule of sleeping and
waking times: Fall asleep and awaken at the same times every day. Keep your body temperature
low at night by turning down the bedroom thermostat and avoiding exercise near bedtime. Refrain
from imbibing caffeine and alcohol, and avoid heavy meals at night. Dim artificial lights in the
evening and turn off LED screens. If you can’t get to sleep after 20 minutes or so, it’s better to get
up and engage in a relaxing activity than it is to stay in bed tossing and turning.

www.getabstract.com

4 of 5

LoginContext[cu=387247,asp=2461,subs=5,free=0,lo=en,co=BG] 2020-04-03 10:52:26 CEST

About the Author
Matthew Walker, PhD, is a professor of neuroscience and psychology at the University of
California, Berkeley, where he directs the Sleep and Neuroimaging Lab. A psychology professor at
Harvard, he has published more than 100 scientific studies.

This document is restricted to the personal use of Christo Popov (christo@fasttrack-europe.com)
getAbstract maintains complete editorial responsibility for all parts of this review. All rights reserved. No part of this review may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic, photocopying or otherwise – without prior written permission of getAbstract AG (Switzerland).

5 of 5
LoginContext[cu=387247,asp=2461,subs=5,free=0,lo=en,co=BG] 2020-04-03 10:52:26 CEST

